# Figure 5: Mutagenesis & ASOs

This folder has code and files relevant to the mutagensis generation and associated Nano-BID-Amp pipeline and analysis, as well as analysis of the impact of ASOs.

## Mutagenesis Generation

### Sequence

`make_seq_mutants.R ` processes a dataset of target input sequences to generate UNUAR 5-mer mutations around the nucleotide position designated as "psipos", which is where a pseudouridine is expected to be deposited. It outputs a csv file containing the newly mutated sequences alongside automatically updated name, motif, and delpos columns.

### Accessibility

The goal of all scripts in this section is to alter the pairing status of target nucleotides - either 1, 2, 3, or 5 at a time. This is done by either breaking an existing pair to create unpaired residues, or by making a pair out of existing unpaired residues. 

An input directory of .fold files, generated by Vienna RNA 2.5.1 ```RNAfold -p -o --MEA <fasta_file>```, is required for these script to run. The script will attempt mutations on all sequences in the directory.

**Break pair** is straight forward: you take the target nucleotide, identify it's pairing partner based on dot-bracket notation, and then mutate the pairing partner to become the same nucleotide as the target nucleotide. So if you start with a target C nucleotide that pairs with a G (C-G pair), you will end up with a C-C pair.

**Make pair** takes one of two strategies. 
1. The first strategy is to "extend stem", wherein the script looks for a stem within 3 nucleotides of the target position. If one is found, the script then makes mutations on the opposing strand from the target, turning residues on the opposing strand into potential pairing partners for the target position(s).
2. The second strategy is to "seed hairpin", taken only if no nearby pairing region is found. In this scenario, mutations are made to the soon-to-be opposing strand to form a 2 base pair stem of a hairpin loop, locking up the target residue.

Structure mutations do not always work as intended. To check on the impact of the mutation, RNAfold is run on the mutated sequence. The script then assesses if the target positions were impacted as anticipated: break pair are now unpaired, make pair are now paired. This only examines pairing status and does not account for potentially larger structure rearrangements.

#### Target Uridine: alter_psi_pairing.R

The script alters the pairing status of a single nucleotide at a constant position across all sequences within the fold directory. 

During make pair - extend stem, the script looks for a maximum of 3 unpaired nucleotide between the target position and start of the stem, non-inclusive.

Example usage:
```
Rscript alter_psi_pairing.R \
  --fold_dir <fold_dir> \
  --output_dir <output_dir> \
  --target_pos 65
```

#### Target Uridine and Plus 1: alter_psi_pairing_01.R

The script alters the pairing status of two nucleotides at a constant position across all sequences within the fold directory. The nucleotides are defined by a target position, and the +1 base immediately downstream of that position.

Break pair is applied to any targets that are both paired or of mixed status (one paired, one unpaired). Make pair is applied to any targets that are both unpaired or of mixed status.

During make pair - extend stem, the script looks for a maximum of 3 unpaired nucleotide between the target position and start of the stem, non-inclusive.

During make pair - seed hairpin, the script creates a 1 nucleotide hairpin with a two nucleotide stem: ((.)) This should probably be updated before the script is used again.

Example usage, targeting positions 65 and 66:
```
Rscript alter_psi_pairing_01.R \
  --fold_dir <fold_dir> \
  --output_dir <output_dir> \
  --target_pos 65
```

#### Unpaired2: alter_3mer_pairing.R

The script alters the pairing status of three nucleotides at a constant position across all sequences within the fold directory. The nucleotides are defined by a target position, and the +1 base immediately downstream of that position, and the -1 base immediately upstream of the that position. The target position should be the center of the block.
This was applied to modulate the pairing status of the unpaired2 region downstream of the target uridine.

There is an additional ```--protect_pos``` argument that prevents any mutations to a 5mer region center on the positions. This is applied to prevent the 5mer sequence motif centered on the pseudouridine from being mutated while trying to alter the target 3mer pairing status.

Break pair is applied to any targets that are both paired or of mixed status (paired and unpaired nucleotides). Make pair is applied to any targets that are both unpaired or of mixed status.

During make pair - extend stem, the script looks for a maximum of 3 unpaired nucleotide between the target position and start of the stem, non-inclusive.

During make pair - seed hairpin, the script creates a 4 nucleotide hairpin with a 3 nucleotide stem: (((....)))

Example usage, targeting positions 72, 73, 74 and protecting positions 63 - 67:
```
Rscript alter_3mer_pairing.R \
  --fold_dir <fold_dir> \
  --output_dir <output_dir> \
  --target_pos 73 \
  --protect_pos 65
```

#### 5mer motif: alter_5mer_pairing.R

The script alters the pairing status of five nucleotides at a constant position across all sequences within the fold directory. The nucleotides are defined by a target position, and the +1 and +2 bases immediately downstream of that position, and the -1 and -2 bases immediately upstream of the that position. The target position should be the center of the block. 
This was applied to modulate the pairing status of the 5mer containing the target uridine.

Break pair is applied to any targets that are both paired or of mixed status (paired and unpaired nucleotides). Make pair is applied to any targets that are both unpaired or of mixed status.

During make pair - extend stem, the script looks for a stem up to 10 nucleotides away from the end of the 5mer.

During make pair - seed hairpin, the script creates a 4 nucleotide hairpin with a 5 nucleotide stem: (((((....)))))

Example usage, targeting positions 63 - 67:
```
Rscript alter_3mer_pairing.R \
  --fold_dir <fold_dir> \
  --output_dir <output_dir> \
  --target_pos 65
```

### Structure

The goal of ```structure_mutation.R``` is to disrupt all base pairs within a defined window (the Pupup signature), and then to restore those base pairs with compensatory mutations.

An input directory of .fold files, generated by Vienna RNA 2.5.1 ```RNAfold -p -o --MEA <fasta_file>```, is required for these script to run. The script will attempt mutations on all sequences in the directory.

The script is given a target position, the target uridine. It protects a 5 nucleotide block center on this position from mutation. It identifies the upstream window as -10 to -3, inclusive, from the target position. It identifies the downstream window as +3 to +15, inclusive, from the target positions.

First, the script generates disruption mutations. It identifies all paired residues within the target window and, similar to the accessibility scripts above, mutates the partner to be identical to the window base. So an A-U pairs, where A is in the window, becomes and A-A mismatch.

Next, the script generates compensation mutations. From the paired residues identified above within the target window, it now mutates the window base to complement its mutated partner. So the A-A mismatch above now becomes an U-A match. This is the opposite of the original A-U pair.

Finally, the script uses RNAfold to predict the dot-bracket notation of the mutated sequences and saves those into a single CSV file `all_mutagenesis_results.csv` for future analysis.

Example Usage:

```bash
Rscript structure_mutation.R \
  --input_dir <fold_dir> \
  --output_dir <output_dir> \
  --position_zero 65
```

### Evaluation

The scripts above look only at the pairing status of the targeted positions. However, mutations could further perturb the predicted structure in unexpected ways.
Therefore, it is important to perform more gross assessments, looking at how the structure at large is impacted using ViennaRNA through the Python module. 

#### Accessibility
To do so, three metrics were calculated from the resultant MEA structures in comparison to parental MEA structures: On Target Score, Off Target Score, and Tree Edit Distance. 
- **On Target Score** checks if the target residues now have the desired pairing status (paired or unpaired) across the entire region of interest.
    - Target Uridine, Break Pair = 1 unpaired
    - Target Uridine, Make Pair = 1 paired
    - Target Uridine and Plus One, Break Pair = 2 unpaired
    - Target Uridine and Plus One, Make Pair = 2 paired
    - 5mer, Break Pair = 5 unpaired
    - 5mer, Make Pair = 5 paired
    - Unpaired2, Break Pair = 3 unpaired
    - Unpaired2, Make Pair = 3 paired
- **Off Target Score** calculates the symmetric distance between the base pairing partners of the parental structure and the base pairing partners of the mutant structure, minus the intended base pairing partner changes, where a value close to zero indicates retention of parental base pairing partners outside of the target region. The top 50% of scores were taken.
- **Tree Edit Distance** assesses the global topological similarity of the coarse-grained structure with RNAdistance, calculating the number of differences in stems, bulges, hairpins, and multiloops between the two structures, where a score closer to zero indicates high similarity.  Mutants were filtered by these metrics, as outlined in the table below, to select those that best implement the intended changes with minimal perturbations to the rest of the structure. The top 50% of scores were taken.

#### Structure
The same three metrics were calculated from the resultant MEA structures in comparison to parental MEA structures, with slightly different methodology. 

**On Target Score**
- For disruption mutations, On Target Score calculates the length of the target region minus the number of unpaired residues within that region. 
- For compensatory mutations, On Target Score calculates the length of the region minus the number of residues in the target reigon that have the same pairing partner as the parental structure. 
- For both calculations of On Target Score, a value close of equal to zero indicates success. 

**Off Target Score** 
- For disruption mutations, it calculates the symmetric distance between all of the base pairing partners of the parental structure and the base pairing partners of the mutant structure minus the intended changes. 
- For compensatory mutations, it calculates the full symmetric distance between all base pairing partners
- For both calculations, a value close to zero indicates retention of parental base pairing partners and success. 

**Tree Edit Distance** assesses the global topological similarity of the coarse-grained structure with RNAdistance, calculating the number of differences in stems, bulges, hairpins, and multiloops between the two structures, where a value closer to zero indicates high similarity.


Targets were included in the pool if their disruption mutations were in the top 50% of On Target Score, top 30% of Off Target Score, and top 50% of Tree Edit Distance. 
Compensatory mutations were included if the disruption mutation for that sequence met the threshold, and the compensatory structure was in the top 50% of On Target Score, top 50% of Off Target Score, and top 50% of Tree Edit Distance. 
In addition, sites of interest (RHBDD2_chr7_75888787, FIS1_chr7_101245032, EIF5_chr14_103342863, IGF2BP1_chr17_49043468, HDAC6_chrX_48823353) were included regardless of score. 

## Mutagenesis Analysis

Nano-BID-Amp data was processed through the file prep outlined in Figure3/file_prep and modification analysis pipeline in Figure3/mpra_sites/modification_analysis.R
Resultant output file is found in mutagenesis_analysis: mutagenesis_data.csv

### Sequence & Pairing Probabililty

To build the boxplot in 5A, run `UNUAR_mutants.R`, which has the data hard-coded into it.

To perform the pairing probability analysis of UNUAR mutants, pairing probabilities were generated by  Vienna RNA 2.5.1 `RNAfold -p -o --MEA <fasta_file>`.
To build the plots in S5A and S5B, run 'UNUAR_pairprob.R', which has the data hard-coded into it.

### Accessibility

To build the boxplots in 5B, 5D, S5C, and S5D, run `accessibility_mutants.R`, which has the data hard-coded into it.

### Structure

To build the barplots in 5C, run `structure_mutants.R`, which has the data hard-coded into it.

## ASO Analysis

To build the plots in 5E and S5E, run `ASO_analysis.R`, which has the data hard-coded into it. 
This will also run the associated statistical analysis. 